We previously took a look at the health endpoint,
but we really only scratched the surface,
let's take a deeper look.
The health endpoint is actually a rather sophisticated machine.
The results may seem simple, but don't let that fool you.
Under the covers,
the health check results are actually an aggregation of a
number of different smaller health checks.
By default,
Spring Boot makes use of the autoconfiguration to
automatically set up health checks for you.
So for instance, if your application utilized elastic search,
Spring Boot would detect the elastic search libraries on the class path and
automatically set up a health check to ensure that elastic search was up and
reachable and that individual elastic search health check would then roll up
with all the other health checks to determine as a whole is the application
healthy or unhealthy.
Lastly,
the Spring Boot Actuator health endpoint allows you to
add completely custom health checks.
So for instance,
consider you had an application that depended on a legacy system.
You could write your own custom health check for the legacy system
and use that as one of the contributing factors to determine the
health status of your application. We'll cover how to write our own custom health checks in the next module.